Wealth-Tax Act, 1957
====================
(Act No. 27 of 1957)
[12th September, 1957]
An Act to provide for the levy of wealth-tax.

CHAPTER I — PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Wealth-tax Act, 1957.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1957.

2. Definitions.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 252 of the Income-tax Act;
(b) "assessee" means a person by whom wealth-tax or any other sum of money is payable under this Act, and includes—
  (i) every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been taken for the determination of wealth-tax payable by him or the wealth-tax paid or payable by any other person;
  (ii) every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of this Act;
(c) "assessment year" means the period of twelve months commencing on the 1st day of April every year;
(d) "assets" includes property of every description, movable or immovable, but does not include—
  (i) agricultural land and growing crops, grass or standing timber on such land;
  (ii) any building owned or occupied by a cultivator of, or receiver of rent or revenue out of, agricultural land: Provided that the building is on or in the immediate vicinity of the land and is a building which the cultivator or receiver of rent or revenue by reason of his connection with the land requires as a dwelling house, or as a store-house, or other out-building;

3. Charge of wealth-tax.
(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, there shall be charged for every assessment year commencing on and from the 1st day of April, 1957, a tax (hereinafter referred to as "wealth-tax") in respect of the net wealth on the corresponding valuation date of every individual, Hindu undivided family and company at the rate or rates specified in Schedule III.

CHAPTER II — LIABILITY TO ASSESSMENT

4. Net wealth to include certain assets.
(1) In computing the net wealth of an individual, there shall be included, as belonging to that individual, the value of assets which on the valuation date are held—
  (a) by the spouse of such individual to whom such assets have been transferred by the individual, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration;
  (b) by a minor child (not being a married daughter) of such individual.

NOTE: The Wealth Tax Act, 1957 was abolished with effect from 1st April, 2016 by the Finance Act, 2015. No wealth tax is applicable from Assessment Year 2016-17 onwards.
